
--- PAGE 1 ---
THE END TIMES
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Social action projects were looked on with skepticism: it was often assumed that anyone who
actually tried to improve the world must not really believe the Bible, because the Bible taught that
such efforts were bound to be futile; as one famous preacher put it, "You don't polish brass on a
sinking ship." That slogan was based on two assumptions:
• first, that the world is nothing more than a "sinking ship";
• second, that any organized program of Christian reconstruction would be nothing more
than "polishing brass."
Evangelism was an invitation to join the losing side. This was rooted in
two problems. One was a false view of Spirituality.
1.2 The unbiblical idea of "spirituality" is that the truly "spiritual" man is:
• the person who is sort of "non-physical," who doesn't get involved in "earthly" things,
who doesn't work very much or think very hard
• One who spends most of his time meditating about how he'd rather be in heaven.
• As long as he's on earth, though, he has one main duty in life: Get stepped on for Jesus.
• The "spiritual" man, in this view, is a wimp. A Loser. But at least he's a Good Loser.
1.3 The Biblical idea of Spirituality
• The Spiritual Man is not someone who floats in mid-air and hears eerie voices. The
Spiritual Man is the man who does what the Bible says (Rom. 8:4-8). This means,
therefore, that we are supposed to get involved in life. God wants us to apply Christian
standards everywhere, in every area.
• Spirituality does not mean retreat and withdrawal from life; it means dominion. The
basic Christian confession of faith is that Jesus is Lord (Rom. 10:9-10) - Lord of all
things, in heaven and on earth. As Lord, He is to be glorified in every area (Rom. 11:36).
1.4 The second obstacle to Christian action has been an eschatology of defeat.
• Our eschatology is our "doctrine of last things," our expectation of the future. And there is
no question about the recent expectations of many Christians: we have looked forward to
failure.
• The world, as we noted, was regarded as a sinking ship. The world is getting worse and
worse. Antichrist is coming. The devil is running the world, and getting more and more
powerful all the time.
• Your work for God in this world will have no lasting effect, except to save a few
individuals from hell. But you'd better do it quickly, before the Tribulation hits, so that
you can escape in time.
Ironically, the unintentional message of this gospel is: Antichrist is coming!
There is something terribly lopsided about that.
1
Sensitivity: Internal (C3)

--- PAGE 2 ---
2. HOPE
2.1 Instead of a message of defeat, the Bible gives us Hope, both in this world and the next.
• The Bible gives us an eschatology of dominion, an eschatology of victory.
• This is not some blind, "everything-will-work-out-somehow" kind of optimism. It is a
solid, confident, Bible-based assurance that, before the Second Coming of Christ, the
gospel will be victorious throughout the entire world.
• In fact, until fairly recently, most Christians held an eschatology of dominion. Most
Christians throughout the history of the Church regarded the eschatology of defeat as a
doctrine of crackpots.
• Athanasius contra mundum (Athanasius against the world). Yet he never lost sight of the
basic fact of world history, that the Word had become flesh, conquering the devil,
redeeming mankind, flooding the world with Light which the darkness could not
overcome.
• I recall a "Jesus People" newspaper of the early 1970s which carried an interview with the
most popular "prophecy expert" of those days. On the basis of the "fact" that Jesus was
going to rapture His Church "at any moment," this man actually counselled his young
followers not to marry and raise families. After all, there was no time for that sort of
thing. The Rapture was coming, so any work for dominion would be useless. (If you were
the devil, could you devise a better, more "spiritual-sounding" excuse for Christians to
abandon God's plan for victory?). The "Rapture Ethic" of those years led many to leave
school, jobs, families, and responsibility in general; flocks of Jesus People wandered
aimlessly around the country, with no clear goal beyond the next Christian rock concert.
2.2 Jesus commanded:
You are the salt of the earth; but if the salt has become tasteless, how will it be made
salty again? It is good for nothing anymore, except to be thrown out and trampled
under foot by men. You are the light of the world. A city set on a hill cannot be
hidden. Nor do men light a lamp, and put it under the peck-measure, but on the
lampstand; and it gives light to all who are in the house. Let your light shine before
men in such a way that they may see your good works and glorify your Father who
is in heaven (Matt. 5:13-16).
• This is nothing less than a mandate for the complete social transformation of the entire
world. And what Jesus condemns is ineffectiveness, failing to change the society around
us.
• We are commanded to live in such a way that someday all men will glorify God -that they
will become converted to the Christian faith.
• We must change the world; and what is more, we shall change the world.
• Accordingly, the Apostle John tells us that:
"the Son of God appeared for this purpose, that He might
destroy the works of the devil" (l John 3:8)
2
Sensitivity: Internal (C3)

--- PAGE 3 ---
2.3 Christ came as the Second Adam, in order to undo the damage brought through the First
Adam (l Cor. 15:22,45; Rom. 5:15-19).
• God had breathed into Adam the breath (in Hebrew, the Spirit) of Life, but Adam's
rebellion brought death into the world.
• In salvation, Christ again breathes into His people the Spirit of Life (John 20:22) –
Eternal Life, which sets us free from the Curse of sin and death (Rom. 8:2), and which
will ultimately result in the restoration of the entire creation (Rom. 8:19-20. In Christ we
really are a new creation (2 Cor. 5:17), because we have been recreated in God's image
(Eph. 4:24; Col.3:10), and clothed again with the glory of God (Rom. 8:29-30).
• Salvation, therefore, restores man to his original calling and purpose, and guarantees that
man's original mandate to exercise dominion under God over the whole earth - will be
fulfilled.
• This does not mean that it must save every individual sinner in the world. It does mean,
however, that the created universe which has been created as a unit must also be saved as
a unit" (An Introduction to Systematic Theology [Presbyterian and Reformed, 1974J, p.
133). Ultimately, Biblical salvation turns back the Curse, brings back Edenic conditions,
repairs personal and social relationships, and blesses the earth in every area. The whole
earth will be saved, and remade into the Garden of God. "For the earth will be full of the
knowledge of the LORD, as the waters cover the sea" Isa. 11:9).
2.4 When the Old Testament foretold the coming of the Christ and the blessings He would bring,
they often spoke in the language of Eden-restoration. Isaiah wrote:
"Indeed, the LORD will comfort Zion; he will comfort all her waste
places. And her wilderness He will make like Eden, and her desert
like the Garden of the LORD; joy and gladness will be found in her,
thanksgiving and sound of a melody" Isa. 51:3; Ezek. 36:33-36).
• Under the protection of the winged Cloud-canopy, man's responsibility was to fulfill the
"cultural mandate," to "fill the earth and subdue it" (Gen. 1:28). In obedient imitation of
his Heavenly Father, man was to reshape, understand, interpret, and rule the world for
God's glory - in short, to build the City of God. The Garden of Eden was a headquarters, a
place to start. But godly rule by King Adam was to encompass the entire world. Thus, the
Second Adam's work is not only restorative (bringing back Eden) but consummative: He
brings the world into the New Jerusalem.
• Scripture assures the New Covenant community that we "have come to Mount Zion and
to the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem" (Heb. 12:22). "You are the light of
the world. A City set on a Hill cannot be hidden....Let your light shine before men...."
(Matt. 5:14-16). there is no Temple within the City, for the City itself is the inner
sanctuary (cf. Eph. 2:19-22); and, at the same time, "the Lord God, the Almighty, and the
Lamb, are its Temple" (Rev. 21:22). John says of Christ that He dwelt (literally,
tabernacled) among us, and we beheld His glory" (john 1:14; cf. Ex. 40:34). John's point
here is to demonstrate that Jesus Christ is the full revelation of God's presence with
His people (cf. Matt. 1:23).
3
Sensitivity: Internal (C3)

--- PAGE 4 ---
3. CHRIST’S KINGDOM
3.1 God showed Daniel an outline of history in which a towering statue (representing the four
empires of Babylon, Medo-Persia, Greece, and Rome) is struck down and crushed by a stone;
"and the stone that struck the statue became a great mountain and filled the whole earth" (Dan.
2:35).
• The meaning of this vision is the restoration of Eden under the King, as Daniel explained:
"In the days of those kings [i.e., during the period of the Roman Empire] the God of
heaven will set up a Kingdom which will never be destroyed; and that Kingdom will not
be left for another people; it will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, but it will
itself endure forever" (Dan. 2:44).
• Christ, the Second Adam, will perform the task assigned to the First Adam, causing the
Holy Mountain to grow and encompass the entire world.
• In a later vision Daniel actually foresaw Christ's enthronement as the promised King:
(Dan. 7:13-14) It is commonly assumed today that this text describes the Second Coming,
and thus that Christ's Kingdom (often called the Millennium) begins only after His
Return. Of course, this ignores the fact that Daniel had already prophesied the Kingdom
beginning in the days of the Roman Empire.
• But notice exactly what Daniel says: Christ is seen going up, not down! The Son of man
is going to the Ancient of Days, not coming from Him! He is not descending in clouds to
the earth, but ascending in clouds to His Father! Daniel was not predicting the Second
Coming of Christ, but rather the climax of the First Advent, in which, after atoning for
sins and defeating death and Satan, the Lord ascended on the clouds of heaven to be
seated on His glorious throne at His Father's right hand.
• Matthew then turns to the ministry of Jesus, giving us a summary of His basic message to
Israel: “Repent, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand” (Matt. 4:17).
• And note well that the Kingdom was not some far-off millennium thousands of years in
the future, after the Second Coming. Jesus announced: “The time is fulfilled, and the
Kingdom of God is at hand; repent and believe in the gospel” (Mark 1:15). This is why He
told His disciples:
Assuredly, I say to you, there are some standing here who will
not taste death until they see the Son of Man coming
in His Kingdom (Matt. 16:28).
• Was Jesus right or wrong? In terms of some modern teachers, Jesus was mistaken. And
this was no slight miscalculation: Jesus missed the mark by thousands of years! Can we
trust Him as Lord and Savior, and still hold that he was wrong, or that somehow His
prophecy got derailed?
• We must believe what Jesus said: within the lifetime of those who were listening to Him,
He would come in His Kingdom. And that is exactly what He did, culminating in His
ascension to His Heavenly throne. Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly
that God has made this Jesus, whom you crucified, both Lord and Christ (Acts 2:30-
36).
4
Sensitivity: Internal (C3)

--- PAGE 5 ---
• And He put all things in subjection under His feet” (Eph.1:20-22). Now, if Christ is
seated now above all rule and authority and power and dominion, if all things are now
under His feet, why are some Christians waiting for His Kingdom to begin? According to
Paul, God “delivered us from the domain of darkness, and transferred us into the
Kingdom of His beloved Son” (Col. 1:13). The Bible says the Kingdom has arrived; some
modern theologians say it hasn’t. Is there really any question about whom we should
believe?
• “the Kingdom of God has come upon you.” He continued: “How can anyone enter the
strong man’s house and carry off his property, unless he first binds the strong man? And
then he will plunder his house” (Matt. 12:28-29). That is exactly what Jesus was doing in
the world. He was binding Satan, the “strong man,” in order to “plunder his house,” to
steal men back from the devil.
• “He made a public display of them, having triumphed over them” (Col. 2:15). The New
Testament unquestionably teaches that through Christ’s bursting the bonds of death Satan
was rendered powerless (Heb. 2:14). John wrote that “the Son of God appeared for this
purpose, that He might destroy the work of the devil” (l John 3:8). Again, we must note
that this is in the past tense. It is an accomplished fact. This is not a prophecy about the
Second Coming. It is a statement of fact about Christ’s First Advent.
3.2 At this point some will object: "If Jesus is King now, why aren't all the nations converted?
Why is there so much ungodliness? Why isn't everything perfect?"
• In the first place, there's no IF about it. Jesus is the King, and His Kingdom has arrived.
The Bible says so. Although the Kingdom was established definitively in the finished
work of Christ, it is established progressively throughout history (until it is established
finally on the Last Day). He is now seated in power above all other rulers in heaven and
earth, possessing all authority. The same letter to the Ephesians that tells us of Christ's
absolute rule over creation (1:20-22), assuring us that we are reigning with Him (2:6), also
commands us to put on armour for battle against the devil (6:10-17). There is no
contradiction here - just two aspects of the same reality.
• And the fact that Jesus is now ruling as King of kings is precisely the reason why we can
have confidence of victory in our conflict with evil. We can experience progressive
triumph now, because Jesus Christ definitively triumphed over Satan in His life, death,
resurrection, and ascension.
• He spoke another parable to them, "The Kingdom of heaven is like leaven, which a
woman took, and hid in three pecks of meal, until it was all leavened" (Matt. 13:31-33).
The Kingdom was established when Christ came. But it has not yet reached its full
development. Note well that all is leavened; the verse is teaching total conquest, by one
side or the other. According to Jesus, therefore, which side will win?
Contrary to pessimists, Jesus did not say that the Kingdom
is like dough, into which someone sneaks destructive, evil leaven. He said that
the Kingdom is like leaven.
5
Sensitivity: Internal (C3)

--- PAGE 6 ---
4. THE GREAT TRIBULATION
4.1 One of the most basic principles for an accurate understanding of the Bible's message is that
Scripture interprets Scripture.
Truly I say to you, this generation will not pass away until all these things take place (Matt. 24:34).
• This means that everything Jesus spoke of in this passage, at least up to verse 34, took
place before the generation then living passed away. "Wait a minute," you say.
"Everything? The witnessing to all nations, the Tribulation, the coming of Christ on the
clouds, the stars falling ... everything?" Yes!
• "Truly I say to you, all these things shall come upon this generation. 0 Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, who kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to her! How often I
wanted to gather your children together, the way a hen gathers her chicks under her
wings, and you were unwilling. Behold, your house is being left to you desolate!" (Matt.
23:36-38).
• Jesus' statement in Matthew 23 sets the stage for His teaching in Matthew 24. Jesus
clearly told of an imminent judgment on Israel for rejecting the Word of God, and for the
final apostasy of rejecting God's Son.
And while some were talking about the Temple, that it was
adorned with beautiful stones and votive gifts, He said, as for
these things which you are looking at, the days will come in
which there will not be left one stone upon another which will
not be torn down" (Luke 21:5-6).
• The only possible interpretation of Jesus' words which He Himself allows, therefore, is
that He was speaking of the destruction of the Temple which then stood in Jerusalem, the
very buildings which the disciples beheld at that moment in history. The Temple of which
Jesus spoke was destroyed in the fall of Jerusalem to the Roman armies in A.D. 70. This is
the only possible interpretation of Jesus' prophecy in this chapter. The Great Tribulation
ended with the destruction of the Temple in A.D. 70.
• The disciples understood the significance of this. They knew that Christ's coming in
judgment to destroy the Temple would mean the utter dissolution of Israel as the covenant
nation. It would be the sign that God had divorced Israel, removing Himself from her
midst, taking the kingdom from her and giving it to another nation (Matt. 21:43).
• It would signal the end of the age, and the coming of an entirely new era in world
history-Jesus Christ's New World Order. From the beginning of creation until A.D. 70, the
world was organized around one central Sanctuary, one single House of God.
• Now, in the New Covenant order, sanctuaries are established wherever true worship
exists, where the sacraments are observed and Christ's special Presence is manifested.
Earlier in His ministry Jesus had said: "An hour is coming when neither in this mountain,
nor in Jerusalem, shall you worship the Father.... But an hour is coming, and now is,
when the true worshipers shall worship the Father in Spirit and truth" (John 4:21-23)
• Jesus responded by giving the disciples not one, but seven signs of the end after asking
for signs of the end in next verse (Luk 21:7). (We must remember that "the end" in this
6
Sensitivity: Internal (C3)

--- PAGE 7 ---
passage is not the end of the world, but rather the end of the age, the end of the Temple,
the sacrificial system, the covenant nation of Israel, and the last remnants of the pre-
Christian era).
• The list begins with certain events which would occur merely as "the beginning of birth
pangs" (Matt. 24:8). In themselves, Jesus warned, they were not to be taken as signals of
an imminent end; thus the disciples should guard against being misled on this point (v. 4).
These "beginning" events, marking the period between Christ's resurrection and the
Temple's destruction in A.D. 70, were as follows:
1. False Messiahs. "For many will come in My name, saying, 'I am the Christ,' and will mislead
many" (v. 5).
2. Wars. "And you will be hearing of wars and rumors of wars; see that you are not frightened, for
those things must take place, but that is not yet the end. For nation will rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom" (v. 6-7a).
3. Natural disasters. "And in various places there will be famines and earthquakes. But all these
things are merely the beginning of birth pangs" (v. 7b-8).
• The next two signs, while they still characterize the period as a whole, do bring us up to a
point near the end of the age:
4. Persecution. "Then they will deliver you up to tribulation, and will kill you, and you will be
hated by all nations on account of My name" (v. 9).
5. Apostasy. "And at that time many will fall away and will betray one another and hate one
another. And many false prophets will arise, and will mislead many. And because lawlessness is
increased, the love of many will grow cold. But the one who endures to the end, he shall be saved"
(v. 10-13).
• These would be the final, definitive signs of the end - one the fulfillment of a process, and
the other a decisive event:
6. Worldwide evangelization.
"And this gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in the whole world for a witness to all the
nations, and then the end shall come" (v. 14).
o At first glance, this seems incredible. Could the gospel have been preached to the
whole world within a generation of these words? The testimony of Scripture is
clear. Not only could it have happened, but it actually did. Proof?
o A few years before the destruction of Jerusalem, Paul wrote to Christians in
Colossae of "the gospel which has come to you, just as in all the world also it is
constantly bearing fruit and increasing" (Col.1:5-6) and exhorted them not to
depart "from the hope of the gospel that you have heard, which was proclaimed in
all creation under heaven" (Col. 1:23). To the church at Rome, Paul announced
that "your faith is being proclaimed throughout the whole world" (Rom. 1:8), for
the voice of gospel preachers "has gone out into all the earth, and their words to
the ends of the world" (Rom. 10:18). According to the infallible Word of God, the
gospel was indeed preached to the whole world, well before Jerusalem was
destroyed in A.D. 70.
7. The Abomination of Desolation.
"Therefore when you see the Abomination of Desolation which was spoken of through
Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy place (Jet the reader understand), then let those
who are in Judea flee to the mountains;
let him who is on the housetop not go down to get the things out that are in his house; and
let him who is in the field not turn back to get his cloak" (v. 15-18).
7
Sensitivity: Internal (C3)

--- PAGE 8 ---
o The Old Testament text Christ referred to is in Daniel 9:26-27, which prophesies
the coming of armies to destroy Jerusalem and the Temple: "The people of the
prince who is to come will destroy the city and the sanctuary.
o The meaning of both Daniel and Matthew is made clear by the parallel reference
in Luke. Instead of "abomination of desolation,"
o Luke reads:
But when you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, then recognize
that her desolation is at hand. Then let those who are in
Judea flee to the mountains, and let those who are in the midst of
the city depart, and let not those who are in the country enter the
city; because these are the days of vengeance, in order that all
things which are written may be fulfilled (Luke 21:20-22).
• The "abomination of desolation," therefore, was to be the armed invasion of
Jerusalem. During the period of the Jewish Wars, Jerusalem was surrounded by
heathen armies several times. But the specific event denoted by Jesus as "the
abomination of desolation" seems to be the occasion when the Edomites (Idumeans),
the agelong enemies of Israel, attacked Jerusalem.
4.2 Historic Background
The Edomites remained true to form, and their characteristic pattern was repeated during the
Great Tribulation. One evening in A.D. 68 the Edomites surrounded the holy city with
20,000 soldiers. As they lay outside the wall, Josephus wrote,"there broke out a prodigious storm
in the night, with the utmost violence, and very strong winds, with the largest showers of rain,
with continual lightnings, terrible thunderings, and amazing concussions and bellowings of the
earth, that was in an earthquake. These things were a manifest indication that some destruction
was coming upon men, when the system of the world was put into this disorder; and anyone
would guess that these wonders foreshowed some grand calamities that were coming." This was
the last opportunity to escape from the doomed city of Jerusalem. Anyone who wished to flee had
to do so immediately, without delay. The Edomites broke into the city and went directly to the
Temple, where they slaughtered 8,500 people by slitting their throats. As the Temple overflowed
with blood, the Edomites rushed madly through the city streets, plundering houses and murdering
everyone they met, including the high priest. According to the historian Josephus, this event
marked "the beginning of the destruction of the city ... from this very day may be dated the
overthrow of her wall, and the ruin of her affairs."
4.3 As is pointed out in Matthew, the Great Tribulation was to take place, not at the end of
history, but in the middle, for nothing similar had occurred "from the beginning of the world until
now, nor ever shall." Thus the prophecy of the Tribulation refers to the destruction of the Temple
in that generation (A.D. 70) alone. It cannot be made to fit into some "double-fulfillment" scheme
of interpretation; the Great Tribulation of A.D. 70 was an absolutely unique event, never to be
repeated.
But immediately after the tribulation of those days the sun will
be darkened, and the moon will not give its light, and the stars
will fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens will be
shaken, and then will appear the sign of the Son of man in
heaven, and all of the tribes of the land will mourn, and they will
see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven with power
8
Sensitivity: Internal (C3)

--- PAGE 9 ---
and great glory. And He will send forth His angels with a great
trumpet and they will gather together His elect from the four
winds, from one end of the heaven to another (Matt. 24:29-30)
• Jesus seems to be saying that the Second Coming will occur immediately after the
Tribulation. Did the Second Coming occur in A.D. 70? Have we missed it? First,
let us be clear about one thing at the outset: there is just no getting around that
word immediately. It means immediately.
• The basis for this symbolism is in Genesis 1:14-16, where the sun, moon, and
stars ("the powers of the heavens") are spoken of as "signs" which "govern" the
world. Later in Scripture, these heavenly lights are used to speak of earthly
authorities and governors; and when God threatens to come against them in
judgment, the same collapsing-universe terminology is used to describe it.
Prophesying the fall of Babylon to the Medes in 539 B.C. (Isa. 13:9-10).
Significantly, Isaiah later prophesied the fall of Edom in terms of de-creation: (Isa.
34:4)
• What Jesus is saying in Matthew 24, therefore, in prophetic terminology
immediately recognizable by his disciples, is that the light of Israel is going to
be extinguished; the covenant nation will cease to exist. When the Tribulation
is over, old Israel will be gone.
• A word-for-word rendering from the Greek actually reads:
And then will appear the sign of the Son of Man in heaven. ...
• As you can see, two important differences come to light in the correct translation: first,
the location spoken of is heaven, not just the sky; second, it is not the sign which is in
heaven, but the Son of Man who is in heaven. The point is simply that this great
judgment upon Israel, the destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple, will be the sign that
Jesus Christ is enthroned in heaven at the Father's right hand, ruling over the
nations and bringing vengeance upon His enemies.
4.4 The prophet Joel foretold both the Day of Pentecost and the destruction of Jerusalem in one
breath: Joel 2:28-31
"and then all the tribes of the land will mourn, and they will see the Son of Man coming on the
clouds of heaven with power and great glory." The word tribes here has primary reference to the
tribes of the land of Israel; and the "mourning" is probably meant in two senses. First, they would
mourn in sorrow over their suffering and the loss of their land; second, they would ultimately
mourn in repentance for their sins, when they are converted from their apostasy (see Chapter 14).
But how is it that they would see Christ coming on the clouds? Those who have read Chapters 7
and 8 of this book should have little trouble answering that question. In the first place, all through
the Old Testament God was coming "on clouds," in salvation of His people and destruction of His
enemies: "He makes the clouds His chariot; He walks upon the wings of the wind" (Ps. 104:3).
When Isaiah prophesied God's judgment on Egypt, he wrote: "Behold, the LORD is riding on a
swift cloud, and is about to come to Egypt; the idols of Egypt will tremble at His presence" Isa.
19:1).
9
Sensitivity: Internal (C3)

--- PAGE 10 ---
• More than this, however, is the fact that Jesus is referring to a specific event connected
with the destruction of Jerusalem and the end of the Old Covenant. He spoke of it again at
His trial, when the High Priest asked Him if He was the Christ, and Jesus replied:
I AM; and you shall see the Son of Man sitting at the
right hand of power, and coming with the clouds
of heaven (Mark 14:62; cf. Matt. 26:64).
• Obviously, Jesus was not referring to an event thousands of years in the future. He was
speaking of something that His contemporaries - "this generation" - would see in their
lifetime. The Bible tells us exactly when Jesus came with the clouds of heaven:
And after He had said these things, He was lifted
up while theywere looking on, and a cloud received Him
out of their sight (Acts 1:9).
• So then, after the Lord had spoken to them, He was received up into heaven, and sat down
at the right hand of God (Mark16:19).
• We noted in Chapter 8 that it was this event, the Ascension to the right hand of God,
which Daniel had foreseen: Dan 7:13-14
The destruction of Jerusalem was the sign that the Son of Man, the Second Adam, was in heaven,
ruling over the world and disposing it for His own purposes.
5. THE RISE OF ANTICHRIST
We tend to neglect the fact that the early Church was the scene of the most dramatic outbreak of
heresy in world history (Acts 15). Using some of the most severe terminology
of his career, Paul pronounced damnation upon the "false brethren" who taught the heresy (see
Gal. 1:6-9; 2:5, 11-21;3:1-3; 5:1-12).
• Paul also foresaw that heresy would infect the churches of Asia Minor. Calling together
the elders of Ephesus, he exhorted them to "be on guard for yourselves and for all the
flock," because "I know that after my departure savage wolves will come in among you,
not sparing the flock; and from among your own selves men will arise, speaking perverse
things, to draw away the disciples after them" (Acts 20:28-30). Some heretics taught that
the final Resurrection had already taken place (2 Tim. 2:18), while others claimed that
resurrection was impossible (I Cor. 15:12); some taught strange doctrines of asceticism
and angel-worship (Col. 2:8, 18-23; 1Tim. 4:1-3), while others advocated all kinds of
immorality and rebellion in the name of "liberty" (2 Pet. 2:1-3, 10-22; Jude 4, 8,10-13,
16).
• The Christian church of the first generation was not only characterized by faith and
miracles; it was also characterized by increasing lawlessness, rebellion, and heresy from
within the Christian community itself - just as Jesus had foretold in Matthew 24.
• The Christians had a specific term for this apostasy. They called it antichrist. In the first
place, consider a fact which will undoubtedly shock some people: the word "antichrist" never
occurs in the Book of Revelation. Not once. Yet the term is routinely used by Christian
teachers as a synonym for "the Beast" of Revelation 13. My point, however, is that the term
10
Sensitivity: Internal (C3)

--- PAGE 11 ---
antichrist is used in a very specific sense, and is essentially related to the figure known as "the
Beast" and "666." A further error teaches that "the Antichrist" is a specific individual.
• First, the Christians had already been warned about the coming of antichrist (l John 2:18;
4:3).
• Second, there was not just one, but "many antichrists" (1John 2:18). The term antichrist,
therefore, cannot be simply a designation of one individual.
• Third, antichrist was already working as John wrote: "even now many antichrists have
arisen" (l John 2:18); "I have written to you concerning those who are trying to deceive
you" (l John 2:26); "you have heard that it is coming, and now it is already in the world" (l
John 4:3); "many deceivers have gone out into the world.... This is the deceiver and the
antichrist" (2 John 7).
• Obviously, if the antichrist was already present in the first century, he was not some
figure who would arise at the end of the world.
• Fourth, antichrist was a system of unbelief, particularly the heresy of denying the person
and work of Jesus Christ. Although the antichrists apparently claimed to belong to the
Father, they taught that Jesus was not the Christ (l John 2:22); in union with the false
prophets (l John 4:1), they denied the Incarnation (1 John 4:3; 2 John 7, 9); and they
rejected apostolic doctrine (l John 4:6).
• Fifth, the antichrists had been members of the Christian Church, but had apostatized (l
John 2:19). Now these apostates were attempting to deceive other Christians, in order to
sway the Church as a whole away from Jesus Christ (l John 2:26; 4:1; 2John 7, 10).
• Putting all this together, we can see that antichrist is a description of both the system of
apostasy and individual apostates. In other words, antichrist was the fulfilment of Jesus'
prophecy that a time of great apostasy would come, when ''many will fall away and will
betray one another and hate one another. And many false prophets will arise, and will
mislead many" (Matt. 24:10-11).
• As Jesus foretold in Matthew 24, the coming of antichrist is a sign of "the End":
"Children, it is the last hour; and just as you heard that antichrist is coming, even now
many antichrists have arisen; from this we know that it is the last hour" (I John 2:18).
• The connection people often make between the antichrist and "the last days" is correct
enough; but what is often missed is the fact that the expression the last days, and similar
terms, are used in the Bible to refer, not to the end of the physical world, but to the last
days of the nation of Israel, the "last days" which ended with the destruction of the
Temple in A.D. 70. Let no one deceive you, for it will not come unless the apostasy comes first
... (2 Thess. 2:3), (Jude 17-19).
• Contrary to some modern expositions of this text, Peter did not say that the miracles of
Pentecost were like what Joel prophesied, or that they were some sort of "proto-fulfilments"
of Joel's prophecy; he said that this was the fulfilment: "This is that which was spoken of
through the prophet Joel."
o The last days were here: the Spirit had been poured out, God's people were
prophesying and speaking in tongues, and Jerusalem would be destroyed with fire.
The ancient prophecies were unfolding, and this generation would not pass until "all
11
Sensitivity: Internal (C3)

--- PAGE 12 ---
these things" were fulfilled. Therefore, Peter urged his listeners, "Be saved from this
perverse generation!" (Acts 2:40).
6. THE CONSUMATION
6.1 The Day of the Lord, therefore, is defined by Scripture in terms of the Glory-Cloud: "For
the Day is near, the Day of the LORD is near; it will be a Day of Clouds, a time of doom
for the nations" (Ezek. 30:3; cf. Joel 2:1-2; Zeph. 1:14-15). Where the Cloud is, there is
the Day of the Lord, when God is manifesting His judgment.
• As we saw in the previous chapter, the Last Day is a synonym for the Last Judgment, at
the end of the world. Moreover, Jesus declared that those who believe in Him will be
resurrected at the Last Day (John 6:39-40, 44, 54). This means that Judgment Day is also
Resurrection Day; both occur together, at the close of history. We can add to this what the
Apostle Paul tells us about the Resurrection:
It will coincide with the Second Coming of Christ and the Rapture
of living believers (I Thess. 4:16-17).
• For Jesus specifically said that whoever believes in Him will be raised "at the Last Day."
That means that all Christians will be resurrected at the Last Day. Again, 1Thessalonians
4 says that all believers will be raised at the Rapture. Obviously, in terms of these texts,
there can be only one Resurrection of believers. And this Resurrection, which coincides
with the Rapture, will take place on the Last Day.
• The Scriptures plainly teach one Resurrection. The Bible says: And at that time your
people shall be delivered, everyone who is found written in the book. Multitudes who
sleep in the dust of the earth will awake: some to everlasting life, some to shame and
everlasting contempt (Dan. 12:1-2).
• Do not marvel at this; for an hour is coming, in which all who are in the tombs shall hear
His voice, and shall come forth; those who did the good deeds to a resurrection of life,
those who committed the evil deeds to a resurrection of judgment (John 5:26-29).
• There shall certainly be a resurrection of both the righteous and the wicked (Acts 24:15).
And I saw a great white throne and Him who sat upon it, from whose face earth and heaven fled
away, and no place was found for them… And the sea gave up the dead which were in it, and
death and Hades gave up the dead which were in them; and they were judged, everyone of them,
according to their deeds. And death and Hades were thrown into the Lake of Fire. This is the
Second Death, the Lake of Fire. And if anyone's name was not found written in the Book of Life,
he was thrown into the Lake of Fire (Rev. 20:11-15).
Having been buried with Him in baptism, in which you were
also raised up with Him through faith in the working of God,
who also raised Him from the dead. (Col. 2:12)
6.2 Christ’s resurrection is the definitive resurrection, the First Resurrection, which took
place on the Third Day. We participate in His resurrection through covenantal baptism, so
12
Sensitivity: Internal (C3)

--- PAGE 13 ---
that now we “walk in newness of life” (Rom. 6:4). When we were dead in our
transgressions, God “made us alive together with Christ . . . and raised us up with Him,
and seated us with Him in the heavenly places, in Christ Jesus” (Eph. 2:5-6; cf. Col. 3:1).
Rev 20:6 Blessed and holy is the one who has a part in the First
Resurrection; over these the Second Death has no power, but they
will be priests of God and of Christ and will reign with
Christ for a thousand years.
• The First Resurrection is thus Spiritual and ethical, our regeneration in Christ and union
with God, our re-creation in His image, our participation in His Resurrection. This
interpretation is confirmed by St. John’s description of those in the First Resurrection – it
completely corresponds with everything he tells us elsewhere about the elect: They are
blessed (Rev20:9,21:2). As Christ promised all the faithful, the Second Death (v. 14) has
no power over them (Rev 2: 11); and they are priests Rev 1:6; 5:10 who reign with Christ
(Rev 2:26-27; 3:21; 4:4; 11:15-16; 12:10).
• The Bible is clear: Through baptism, we have been resurrected to eternal life and rule
with Christ now, in this age. The First Resurrection is taking place now. Jesus Christ is
reigning now (Acts 2:29-36; Rev. 1:5). And this means, of necessity, that the Millennium
is taking place now as well.
But now Christ has been raised from the dead, and has become
the first fruits of those who are asleep. For since by a man came
death, by a man also came the resurrection of the dead. For as in
Adam all die, so also in Christ shall all be made alive. But each
in his own order: Christ the firstfruits; after that, those who are
Christ's at His coming. Then comes the End, when He shall have
delivered up the kingdom to the God and Father, when He shall
have abolished all rule and all authority and power. For He must
reign until He has put all enemies under His feet. The last enemy
that will be abolished is death (l Cor. 15:20-26).
6.3 The Resurrection takes place in two stages:
• First Christ is raised, and then we are resurrected - firstfruits, then harvest. (Note well: no
other stages are mentioned.)
• Second, we are told when the Resurrection takes place: "at His coming." Since we already
knew that the Resurrection coincides with the Last Judgment, we now know that Christ's
Second Coming will be on the Last Day, at the Judgment.
• Third, the text also informs us that these events occur at "the End. Paul goes on to tell us
that the End comes "when He shall have delivered the kingdom to the God and Father,
when He shall have abolished all rule and all authority and power."
o The End here is, simply, the End - the end of time, of history, and of the world. It is
the end of the "Millennium," the consummation of the Kingdom - the precise moment
when the Book of Revelation, in complete harmony with 1Corinthians, places the
Resurrection and the Last Judgment (Rev. 20:11-15).
13
Sensitivity: Internal (C3)

--- PAGE 14 ---
• Fourth, Christ's present reign, which began at His Resurrection and ascension, continues
"until He has put all His enemies under His feet." This statement comes from Psalm
110:1, where God the Father says to the Son: "Sit Thou at My right hand, until I make
Thine enemies a footstool for Thy feet." We know that at Christ's ascension He did sit at
the Father's right hand. (Mark 16:19; Luke 22:69; Acts 7:55-56; Rom. 8:34; Eph.1:20-22;
Col. 3:1; Heb. 1:3; 8:1; 10:12; 12:2; 1Pet. 3:22).
o According to Scripture, therefore, Jesus Christ is now ruling from His heavenly
throne, while all His enemies are being made into a footstool for His feet. The
implications of these texts are inescapable:
Christ has ascended to the throne, and He will not
return until the last enemy has been defeated, at the Resurrection
on the Last Day. "For He must reign, until He has put all
His enemies under His feet." Reign from Heaven (seated on the throne)
o We must remember that the Bible speaks of salvation in terms of the definitive-
progressive-final pattern which we noted before.
o Definitively, all things were placed under Christ's feet at His ascension to His heavenly
throne; in principle, He rules the world now as the Second Adam.
o Progressively, He is now engaged in conquering the nations by the gospel, extending
His rule to the farthest corners of the earth.
o Finally, the Day will come when Christ's actual conquest of the world is complete,
when all enemies have been abolished. This will be the End, when "at the name of
Jesus every knee shall bow ... and every tongue shall confess that Jesus Christ is Lord,
to the glory of God the Father" (Phil. 2:10-11).
• Fifth, underscoring the fact that the Resurrection occurs at the end of the Millennium,
Paul says that "the last enemy that will be abolished is death." Christ's present reign will
witness the gradual abolition of all enemies, the progressive defeat of every remnant of
Adam's rebellion, until only one thing remains to be destroyed: Death
6.4 The Last Battle (Rev 20:7-10)
Although the Christian “wheat” will be dominant in world culture, both the wheat and the tares
will grow together until the harvest at the end of the world (Matt. 13:37-43). At that point, as the
potential of both groups comes to maturity, as each side becomes fully self-conscious in its
determination to obey or rebel, there will be a final conflict. The Dragon will be released for a
short time, to deceive the nations in his last-ditch attempt to overthrow the Kingdom.
6.4.1 The Release of Satan
• The devil is bound for thousand years, so that he deceives not the nations. The specific
purpose of the binding of the Dragon is to prevent him from inciting the eschatological
“war to end all wars,” the final battle (that will force God to bring judgement
prematurely, i.e., to destroy the wheat with the chaff (Matt. 13:24-30)) – until God is
ready.
• The number seven connotes a fullness of quality in Biblical imagery, the number ten
contains the idea of a fullness of quantity; in other words, it stands for manyness. It's
denoting a long period, continuing until he shall have put all his enemies under his feet (1
Cor. 15:25). continues until he shall have put all his enemies under his feet (1 Cor. 15:25).
14
Sensitivity: Internal (C3)

--- PAGE 15 ---
Therefore, thousand years means many years, not literally 1000. In fact, we are now more
than 2000 years since the death and ascension of Christ, therefore, thousand years denotes
a period when the kingdom would have fully matured.
• When God’s kingdom is fully matured (completion of thousand years) - when the leaven
has leavened the entire dough, when the stone from Daniel’s prophesy has filled the
whole earth, then will the devil be released.
• The maturity and fruition of the Kingdom speaks about nations living in a Christianized
world-order. So, the question is, why will the nations rebel after living in a Christianized
world-order? A study by Gary North titled “Common Grace, Eschatology, and Biblical
Law explains that both the regenerate culture and the unregenerate culture, as “wheat”
and “tares,” develop historically toward greater consistency of their self-consciousness to
obey or to disobey God.
Satanist will realise that the devil’s plan of chaos and lawlessness does not work for they
advantage in a Christianized world-order, hence, they will learn more about God's truth
and order, but pervert them and use them against God's people. They use the knowledge
of the truth (common grace) to pervert the truth and to attack God’s people. They adopt a
perverted form of truth to use in their rebellious plans.
This led us to another important point that not all people on earth will be saved though
the entire world would be Christianized. The bible does not teach absolute universalist;
nor does it teach that at some future point in history absolutely everyone living will be
converted. Ezekiel’s prophecy of the River of Life suggests that some outlying areas of
the world – the “swamps” and “marshes” – will not be healed, but will be “given over to
salt,” remaining unrenewed by the living waters (Ezek. 47:11). Although the Christian
“wheat” will be dominant in world culture, both the wheat and the tares will grow
together until the harvest at the end of the world (Matt. 13:37-43).
• At that point, as the potential of both groups (wheat and tares) comes to maturity, as each
side becomes fully self-conscious in its determination to obey or rebel, there will be a
final conflict. The Dragon will be released for a short time, to deceive the nations in his
last-ditch attempt to overthrow the Kingdom.
• The devil and his forces quantity is like the sand of the sea (Rev 20:8). God’s reason for
allowing the devil and his vast multitude to fight against the Church is not in order to
destroy the Church, but in order to bring the Church a speedier victory. This is so that
God may immediately crush them, finishing them off quickly, in one fell swoop. Fire
came down from heaven and devoured them, as it had the wicked citizens of Sodom and
Gomorrah (Gen. 19:24-25), and the soldiers of Ahaziah who came against Elijah (2 Kings
1:10, 12).
• The Dragon’s release from the Abyss had been a trap from the very beginning, intended
merely to draw his forces out into the open, to make them visible in order for God to
destroy them.
6.4.2 Final Judgement (Rev 20:11-15)
• The one who is seated on the white is Christ. His previously seen seated on a white cloud
(Rev 14:14) and a white horse (Rev 6:2; 19:11).
15
Sensitivity: Internal (C3)

--- PAGE 16 ---
• Matt. 28:18; John 5:27; Phil. 2:9-10 make it clear that the honor of judging the living and
the dead was conferred on Christ as Mediator in reward for His atoning work and as part
of His exaltation. For the saints, God’s judgment is redemptive, not destructive.
• Theses verses above actually talk about judgement concerned with the "wicked dead" -
I.e., those under the judgement of the Second Death. So, this judgement does not concern
the Elects who's names are written in the Book of Life. This is not general judgment of all
people, but of the wicked, called here the dead.
• The great and the small, stand before the Throne to be judged and The Book of Life is
opened to reveal that their names (the dead) do not appear therein. They were judged
according to their works. This does not imply salvation by works but point to damnation
by works. We are not saved by works (Eph. 2:8-9), but salvation must be accompanied by
good works (Eph. 2:10; Phil. 2:12-13). Faith without deeds is dead. Men’s actions will
come into judgment at the Last Day.
• The Sea gave up the dead which were in it – those who perished in the judgments of the
Flood and the Ref Sea.... and Death and Hades gave up the dead which were in them.
God emptying “all supposable places where the dead (non-Covenant people) could be
found.
• Death and Hades are thrown into the lake of fire. The last enemy to be destroyed is
death. death and Hades are ultimately as powerless as the other forces of evil. Finally,
there is no power but that of God.
• This is the Second Death, the lake of fire. And if anyone was not found written in the
Book of Life, he was thrown into the lake of fire. The rest of the dead” will never live,
for there is no life outside of Jesus Christ
16
Sensitivity: Internal (C3)